# Assorted Thoughts 

`10/02/2022`

## Should you attend private (prep) school? 
Having reached a point in my life where I've met a good number of people with a variety of background whose chief commonality is having earned admittance into a "prestigious" university, I feel inclined (and somewhat well-equipped?) to talk about the benefits/drawbacks/value of a private---specifically, college preparatory---education. I should mention that I best understand "new school", west coast, silicon valley style prep schools as opposed to east coast boarding schools (at any rate, I consider those schools to be distinct enough from most other schools in the country to warrant a separate discussion). There is also the issue of tuition, which I sidestep seeing as it's not a particularly fruitful point (surprise, surprise: these schools can be extremely expensive and, if you come from a middle class background like I did, the expense should probably take the foreground of your concerns).

The answer obviously depends on who the student in question is and what their needs are. But I think among any student's characteristics, the most relevant characteristic is *drive*. In fact, I think there's a sort of horseshoe theory that one can assign to a student's drive when considering prep schools. In my experience the pattern is as follows: 
1. There are students who are not particularly driven. This may be for a variety of reasons, such as preoccupations with nonacademic concerns, exceptional learning needs, so on. What I've observed is that these students don't fare well in prep schools. These schools (as many know) can attract a lot of competitive students, creating an occasionally tense and unfriendly atmosphere which can be extremely discouraging for students who are struggling to stay on top of work. There is a misconception that prep schools will "straighten out" these students; in my experience the higher-pressure environment doesn't do much more than wreck their self-esteem. There are ways to work around this---hiring private tutors, discussing options with administrators or teachers, etc.---but I should admit I don't have much of value to say other than that I haven't seen many kids do too well in these types of schools. Of course, regardless of one's performance, graduating from a prep school does guarantee a base level of competitiveness in a college application, but the the tradeoff this offers over the degree to which the student will struggle drops off with decreasing academic drive. 