# Thoughts on Private (Prep) School

`10/02/2022`

Having reached a point in my life where I've met a good number of people with a variety of background whose chief commonality is having earned admittance into a "prestigious" university, I feel inclined (and somewhat well-equipped?) to talk about the benefits/drawbacks/value of a private---specifically, college preparatory---education. I should mention that I best understand "new school", west coast, silicon valley style prep schools as opposed to east coast boarding schools (at any rate, I consider those schools to be distinct enough from most other schools in the country to warrant a separate discussion). There is also the issue of tuition, which I sidestep seeing as it's not a particularly fruitful point (surprise, surprise: these schools can be extremely expensive and, if you come from a middle class background like I did, the expense should be the foremost concern). Modulo the eye-rolling associated with private school culture and rich people and so on, this is all motivated by my considering: *if* I ever have kids, and *if* I have the means to send them to a private school... should I? I think it's an interesting question that maybe doesn't get thought about as much as it should.

The answer obviously depends on who the student in question is and what their needs are. But I think among any student's characteristics, the most relevant is their degree of *drive*. In fact, I think there's a sort of horseshoe theory that one can assign to a student's drive when considering prep schools. In my experience the pattern is as follows: 

1. There are students who are not particularly driven. This may be for a variety of reasons, such as preoccupations with nonacademic concerns, exceptional learning needs, so on. What I've observed is that these students don't fare well in prep schools. These schools (as many know) can attract a lot of competitive students, creating an occasionally tense and unfriendly atmosphere which can be extremely discouraging for students who are struggling to stay on top of work. There is a misconception that prep schools will "straighten out" these students; in my experience the higher-pressure environment doesn't do much more than wreck their self-esteem. This in turn discourages them from catching up with work, and so begins a vicious cycle. There are ways to work around this---hiring private tutors, discussing options with administrators or teachers, working with the student to inspire some more motivation, etc.---and I should admit this is the type of student I've had the least exposure to. Besides, regardless of one's performance, graduating from a prep school does guarantee a base level of competitiveness in a college application, I merely suggest that the the tradeoff this offers over the degree to which the student will struggle drops off with decreasing academic drive. 
2. There are students who are moderately driven. If we are imagining a normal distribution, this is the mean. These students get the most out of prep school, I believe: they are capable of keeping up with the schoolwork, are interested in some of the subjects they encounter in school, and perhaps are involved in (but not exceptionally committed to) extracurriculars. These are the students for whom a prep education will make the most difference, I think, because if they attended public school, they would not have an exceptional application (conversely, their application is boosted by the prep school's reputation), and at the same time they are capable of managing the worst of a prep school. There is also a point to be made about the prep school training the student to have a stronger work ethic, which will help them in college.
3. Then there are students who are "exceptionally" driven. This is the class of student I've spent the most time thinking about regarding the value of prep school. As it stands, I actually think students of this sort can be hindered by prep schools (and I could cite some anecdotal examples. There is one person I can think of who I saw do much better having transferred from a private school to a public school.) The main reason I find this to be the case is because prep schools tend to have a much more "structured" curriculum and whatnot; there is typically a narrower selection of classes, be they in the sciences or the arts, I believe because there are less kids generally and thus these programs have insufficient student interest. As a matter of fact, the lack of students carries consequences for extracurriculars such as clubs---any given activity will garner less interest, or put another way, a student with a specific interest might struggle to find peers who share that interest. A larger school might then provide the student with a larger number of peers who might share interests, leading to the formation of clubs and other things which look good on applications, and perhaps encouraging the student to pursue that interest further. But note this is an issue of school size, not of school type. And, even then, why not just have the student participate in said extracurricular at an outside of school program? This is not a bad idea at all, but I hesitate to immediately embrace it because (1) the workload these prep schools assign can make it difficult to introduce said extracurriculars and (2) the more relaxed workload a public school might assign could provide the student with the time to pursue that extracurricular with sufficiently more conviction to really make a difference in college application. (I suppose there is a third point, namely that the said interest could be academic in nature, i.e., something for which there is no "after school" program; but then here I am implicitly excluding private schools which are targeted toward a specialty, e.g., charter schools.) Good college applicants have good grades; *great* college applicants have good grades *and a small set of extracurricular activities they have pursued with demonstrable conviction*. 

I obviously am course-graining over *a lot*, and I'm not particularly wedded to the model. As with any model, it should be abandoned should the simplifications prove too restrictive. It's all subject to change.

`Edit 10/14/2022:` Grace brought to my attention that it isn't unusual for students to seek out prep schools precisely because they offer strong extracurriculars in addition to strong academics, e.g., sports which are more expensive by nature and thus require more funding. People will seek admittance into these schools with the aim of being recruited (usually, I think, for a niche sport). That's a very good point that the above discussion misses by generalizing prep schools too much. I suppose the takeaway is that it all hinges not only on the student in question but also the school in question. 